---
layout: post
title:  "Project 2 - Exploratory Data Analysis"
project: true
---

Civic data analyses of *SAT scores by state* & *drug use by age*; looking for useful patterns and possible hypotheses. EDA is an essential part of the data science analysis pipeline. Proper EDA gives birth to good models and meaningful conclusions.

[View project 2 code on github](https://github.com/roshanlulu/gaProjects/tree/master/gaProject2)


### Aim
- EDA
- Visualization
- Summary statistics
- Familiarize datasets
- Describe
- Data Dictionary
- Distribution plots
- Pairplot
- Stacked histogram
- Box plot
- Standardization (extremely helpful when plotting boxplots)
- Examine
- Dataframes, Dataframes, Dataframes!!
- Correlation matrices
- Data Cleaning
- Long and wide dataframes(melt)
- Correlatino heat map
- Outlierss


### Used
- python
- numpy
- pandas
- matplotlib
- seaborn
- csv
- scipy (stats)
- re (regular expressions)

### Takeaways
1. **Describe how the covariance matrix is different from the correlation matrix.**
    - Correlation is measured in the range -1 to 1 and is easier to interpret. Covariance values are dependant on thevariance and unit of the values and is not a good measure to compare relations as they are not normalized.

2. **What is the process to convert the covariance into the correlation**
    - Cor(X,Y) = Cov(X, Y) / Std(X) Std(Y)

3. **Why is the correlation matrix preferred to the covariance matrix for examining relationships in your data?**
    - "Covariance is the measure of relatedness between variables. Covariance is not very interpretable. The values are difficult to read because they are relative to the variance of the variables. A much more common metric, and one directly calculable from the covariance, is the correlation."

4. **How does the spearman correlation compare to the pearson correlation?**
    - The Spearman rank correlation of Verbal and Math values is equal to the Pearsons correlation of the Rank of Verbal and Math values.(Inferred from the below steps)

5. **Describe clearly in words the process of calculating the spearman rank correlation.**
Hint: the word "rank" is in the name of the process for a reason! 
    - Get the rank list of the series that are to be compared.
    - Find the covariance between the rank data.
    - Calculate individual standard deviations.
    - Divide Covariance by the product of standard deviations.
    - This is the spearman rank correlation.

6. **How can you numerically define outliers?**
    - Mathematically, Tukey method can be used to find outliers
    - Numerical description of outlier(Mathematical formulae): 
        - Low outliers = Q1 – 1.5(Q3 – Q1) = Q1 – 1.5(IQR)
        - High outliers = Q3 + 1.5(Q3 – Q1) = Q3 + 1.5(IQR)
        - Where:
        - Q1 = first quartile
        - Q3 = third quartile
        - IQR = Interquartile range